* What is the world database?

It’s a sample database provided by MySQL.
It contains realistic data about countries, cities, and languages, which makes it perfect for learning SQL.
It has multiple tables:
country → information about countries (name, population, GNP, etc.)
city → information about cities (name, population, district, country code)
countrylanguage → which languages are spoken in which countries
By importing it, you now have a ready-made dataset to practice queries on.

* Here’s the simplified workflow:

Install MySQL
Using Homebrew: brew install mysql  (Homebrew is a free and open-source package manager that lets you easily install, update, and manage software on macOS and Linux from the command line)
Start the MySQL service: brew services start mysql
Secure MySQL (MySQL is a relational database management system (RDBMS), It stores, organizes, and retrieves data for applications.)
Run: mysql_secure_installation
This sets a root password, removes test databases, and restricts access. (root password is the password for the root user, which is the most powerful user account on a system or in a database. Think of it like the “administrator key” that has full control over everything. Root password is the password needed to log in as root or perform superuser actions if sudo isn’t used. )
Lesson: Always secure your database before using it seriously.
Log in to MySQL
Command: mysql -u root -p
-u root → username is root
-p → prompt for password
Import the database
You downloaded the world.sql file (or ZIP) and unzipped it.
Command:
mysql -u root -p < ~/Downloads/world-db/world.sql
This reads the .sql file and creates all tables and fills them with data.
Check that it worked
SHOW DATABASES; → lists all databases, including world
USE world; → select it for queries
SHOW TABLES; → shows all tables in the world database

* Lesson Summary
The “lesson” is:
Install MySQL and make sure the service is running.
Secure it with a root password.
Log in as root and confirm it works.
Import your .sql file to create a database and tables.
Verify that the database and tables exist.
You can now write SQL queries against the tables.

Think of world.sql as a “recipe” that tells MySQL:
Create a database called world
Create tables like country, city, countrylanguage
Fill them with data

An SQL query is a command you type to retrieve or manipulate data. example SELECT * FROM country;


Your assignment basically has three parts:

Basic SQL queries – retrieving data from tables (SELECT statements, WHERE, ORDER BY)
Aggregate functions & grouping – counting, summing, averaging, grouping data (COUNT, SUM, AVG, GROUP BY)
Subqueries – queries within queries to filter or calculate based on other results

Since you now have the world database installed in MySQL, you’ll be writing SQL queries against its tables (country, city, countrylanguage).


✅ For learning SQL and completing this assignment, I recommend start in the terminal first. Later you can move queries into PyCharm if needed.

prompt: okey now lets start with the assignment as instructed , tell me exactly what platform to open what to write and how to do it and explain in a way as its my first time ever working with databases and this sort of stuff


How to Work Through Your Assignment

The assignment gives questions like 1a, 1b, etc.
Read the question carefully
Figure out which table it relates to (country, city, countrylanguage).
Open MySQL terminal.
Type the query.
Copy the result into your assignment document.
Mark that you completed that question in the table (1a, 1b, etc.).

se document for answers!


first :
mysql -u your_username -p
mysql>

then: List databases
SHOW DATABASES;
You should see world listed among them.
---> USE world;
Database changed

then: Check the tables
SHOW TABLES;

lastly Run your queries