
-- bcs i go from python to .sql i need to run this script as a SQL query.
-- I am using PyCharm Community Edition, which doesn't have built-in database tools
-- so writing the file doesn’t run the SQL — it’s just text until you execute it using a database engine.
-- I need to use an external tool (such as MySQL Workbench, DBeaver, or SQLite3 command-line tools) to run my .sql file.

sqlite3 --version
sqlite3 mydatabase.db
.read path/to/yourfile.sql

If you want a graphical interface:
For SQLite:
Choose the .db file you created earlier.
✅ Done! You can see your tables and data in the sidebar.

Regardless of which database you use: .sql files are plain text in GitHub

---------------------------------------------------------------------
Your Workflow Overview

Here’s the standard workflow when working with .sql files in a project:

Step	Tool	Purpose
1	PyCharm	Write or edit .sql files (like setup.sql, insert_data.sql, etc.)
2	DBeaver	Connect to your database (mydatabase.db) and run SQL scripts to create tables, insert data, or query data
3	GitHub	Version control your .sql files so you can share or collaborate
4	Optional	Python scripts or apps can also connect to mydatabase.db to use the data

💡 Key point: PyCharm edits, DBeaver runs, GitHub stores. That’s the typical separation.

Run Your SQL Scripts in DBeaver

In the Database Navigator, right-click your database → SQL Editor → New SQL Script.

In the editor that opens:

Either copy-paste your SQL from setup.sql, or

Click Open File and select setup.sql.

Click the green ▶️ Execute button (or press ⌘ + Enter) to run all the SQL commands.

You can now see the tables you created in the Database Navigator → Tables section.

To check data:

Right-click a table (e.g., users) → View Data → All Rows.

Now you can visually confirm your database contents.

3️⃣ Keep Your .sql Files in GitHub

Even though DBeaver edits the database, you do not commit the .db file (optional, usually only for small projects). Instead:

Make sure setup.sql is in your GitHub repo (it should be in your PyCharm project folder).

In PyCharm Terminal:

git status       # See untracked files
git add setup.sql
git commit -m "Add initial SQL setup"
git push


Now your .sql script is versioned. Anyone else can run it on their own SQLite database and get the same tables/data.

This is how developers share SQL: the script files, not always the actual .db database.

4️⃣ Editing / Updating

If you want to add new tables or data:

Edit or create a new .sql file in PyCharm (e.g., insert_more_data.sql).

Run it in DBeaver on your database.

Commit the new .sql file to GitHub.

This way, your SQL workflow is fully version controlled and reproducible.

5️⃣ Optional: Automate Running SQL from Python

Later, you can even write a Python script that connects to your SQLite database and runs your .sql files automatically using the sqlite3 library:

import sqlite3

conn = sqlite3.connect("mydatabase.db")
cursor = conn.cursor()

with open("setup.sql") as f:
    sql_script = f.read()

cursor.executescript(sql_script)
conn.commit()
conn.close()


This is how many developers integrate SQL into Python projects while keeping .sql scripts in GitHub.


✅ Summary

Write/edit .sql in PyCharm.
Run .sql in DBeaver to see tables and data.
Commit .sql to GitHub for version control.
Repeat — create new scripts as your project grows.







---------------------------------------------------------------------
--- From the beginning ---

Step 0: Project setup

Repo path:

/Users/zineb/Pycharm/September/DatabaseTechnology-25


You already have it cloned to PyCharm and it’s connected to GitHub.

Step 1: Create a new SQL file in PyCharm

In PyCharm, right-click the repo folder → New → File.

Name it something descriptive, e.g.:

create_students_table.sql


Inside the file, write your SQL commands. Example:

-- create a table called students
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS students (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    name TEXT NOT NULL,
    major TEXT
);

-- insert some sample data
INSERT INTO students (name, major)
VALUES
('Alice', 'Computer Science'),
('Bob', 'Mathematics');


Save the file.
✅ This is now part of your repo folder.

Step 2: Run the SQL file in DBeaver

Open DBeaver → make sure your SQLite connection is pointing to:

/Users/zineb/Pycharm/September/DatabaseTechnology-25/mydatabase.db


Right-click the database → SQL Editor → New SQL Script.

Open the SQL file you just created (or copy/paste its contents into the editor).

Click Execute (green ▶️).

DBeaver will now create the students table and insert your data.

Expand the database → Tables → students → View Data → All Rows to see Alice and Bob.

Step 3: Commit your SQL file to GitHub

In PyCharm Terminal:

cd /Users/zineb/Pycharm/September/DatabaseTechnology-25
git status


You should see your new SQL file listed. Then:

git add create_students_table.sql
git commit -m "Add create_students_table.sql with initial sample data"
git push


✅ Your SQL file is now versioned and stored in GitHub.

Other team members can clone the repo, run this SQL file on their own database, and get the same tables/data.

Step 4: Workflow for future SQL files

Every time you want to create a new table or update the database, follow this pattern:

PyCharm → create a new .sql file in the repo, e.g.:

add_courses_table.sql


Write the SQL commands. Example:

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS courses (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    course_name TEXT,
    credits INTEGER
);

INSERT INTO courses (course_name, credits)
VALUES ('Databases', 5), ('Algorithms', 4);


DBeaver → open the database → run this .sql file.

Verify tables/data in DBeaver.

GitHub → commit the .sql file.

Repeat this process — each .sql file is a versioned, reusable script.

Step 5: Optional — Python integration

If later you want to use your database in a Python project:

import sqlite3

conn = sqlite3.connect("mydatabase.db")
cursor = conn.cursor()

# Run a SQL file programmatically
with open("create_students_table.sql") as f:
    sql_script = f.read()

cursor.executescript(sql_script)
conn.commit()
conn.close()


This allows you to automate applying SQL scripts for testing or deployment.

✅ Summary Workflow

PyCharm: Write .sql files in the repo.

DBeaver: Run the .sql files on your database and check data visually.

GitHub: Commit .sql files for version control and collaboration.

Optional Python: Use .sql scripts programmatically.

























-- Example run
-- This script will create a users table, insert three rows of data, and then retrieve and display all the rows from the users table.

-- Create a test table
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS users (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    name VARCHAR(100),
    email VARCHAR(100)
);

-- Insert some data
INSERT INTO users (name, email) VALUES ('Alice', 'alice@example.com');
INSERT INTO users (name, email) VALUES ('Bob', 'bob@example.com');
INSERT INTO users (name, email) VALUES ('Charlie', 'charlie@example.com');

-- Query the data
SELECT * FROM users;
